### Data Build


goMortgage will build the model/validate/assess ClickHouse table(s).  As set up in the examples, these
all reside in the same table. Disjoint sets of data are pulled for each of the three purposes.


goMortgage is designed to be flexible in building modeling data. However, there *is* a structure to the approach.
goMortgage will pull stratified and simple random samples from the source loan-level database.

In its current version, it is set up to work with the Fannie Mae data as built by this [app]().
The goal has been to make it modifiable to other data sources.


#### Sampling the Loan-level Data

The terminology used here is:

    - as-of date.  The date at which we have actual information and start the forecast from.  Fields that are derived
      from this date start with 'ao'.
    - as-of age. The loan age at the as-of date.
    - forecast month.  The number of months into the future we are forecasting. Fields that refer to this point in
      time start with 'trg'.
    - month. The calendar month at the forecast month.

Conceptually, one can imagine the data to be sampled as the set of all pairs of the form

       (as-of age, forecast month)

It is not practical to create this table, so another strategy must be employed. goMortgage does the selection in two
stages: 

1. Pull a sample of loans based on as-of age. This table fixes the as-of age but all possible values
of forecast month are not yet selected. 
2. Sample this data set to select the forecast month.

There are other potential considerations.  Stratifying on as-of age alone will likely lead to a sample that 
is very unevenly
distributed across the as-of date (the calendar date corresponding to the as-of age).  
This is undesirable if you'd
like a good representation across time periods. With goMortgage, it's possible to stratify on *both* fields.

Simiarly, on the second stage sample one can specify both forecast month and 'month' (calendar month corresponding to
the forecast month).

Further, goMortgage can stratify along other dimensions.
For instance, to avoid building a model dominated by loans in California, one can stratify on state.
Or, you could build a California-only model using the WHERE1 key in the specs file.  Stratifying along
loan age and forecast month alone may produce a sample that is concentrated on certain vintages or performance
periods.

There is a third stage to the data build. This joins the sampled loans to other (*e.g.* economic) data.  The table
is joined by geo (e.g. zip3, state, zip) at four time periods:

1. The origination date.
2. The as-of date.
3. The target date.
4. January 2020.

The utility of the first 3 is self-evident.  Why January 2020? So that we have a baseline to normalize
values so that the model isn't confused by trends in (say) house prices.

In short, this is the goMortgage process:

     1. Sample the loan-level data along a set of user-specified dimensions to produce a sample stratified
     along your choice of fields.  This dataset consists of loans and as-of dates.

     2. Sample the table above along a set of user-specified dimensions. The universe of available data is
     each loan in the sampled data at any date after the as-of date.

     3. Join the table in 2 to the economic data.


### .gom File Entries

These keys specify the data source and fields to use.

- mtgDb: {ClickHouse table}<br>is the source of the loan-level data. Example:

      mtgDb: mtg.fannie

- mtgFields: {source}<br>Is a key that specifies the source of the data.  goMortgage has built-in an understanding
of two sources - fannie and freddie. The fannie and freddie ClickHouse tables can be built using these
packages: [fannie](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/invertedv/fannie) and 
[freddie](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/invertedv/freddie).
Example:

      mtgFields: fannie

- econDb: {ClickHouse table}<br>is the source table for the economic data to be merged in stage 3. The table
needs to have an entry for each month and some geo-level. Example:

      econDb: econGo.final

- econFields: {source}<br>is a key that specifies the geo-based join field.  For Fannie/Freddie data the
most granular resolution is zip3. Example:

      econFields: zip3

These keys control the stage 1 sampling:

- strats1: {field list} <br>This key specifies the fields to stratify on in the first stage. Example:

       strats1: state, aoDt, aoAge

- sampleSize1: {int}<br>Specifies the target size of the sample generated by stage 1. Example:

        sampleSize1: 5000000
 
- where1: {WHERE clause}<br>Restricts the table while creating the sample. Example:

        where1: AND aoAge >= 0 AND aoDq >= 0 AND aoDq <= 24 AND aoUpb > 10000 AND mon.zb='00' AND aoMod='N' AND aoBap in ['N', '7', '9']

- pass1Strat: {ClickHouse table}<br>The pass1Strat key specifies a ClickHouse table to create which summarizes the
stratification process.  The table lists each level of the strats and counts. Example:

        pass1Strat: tmp.strat1Mod
 
- pass1Sample: {ClickHouse table}<br>Specifies a ClickHouse table to create which has the sampled loans. Example:

        pass1Sample: tmp.sample1Mod

The stage two keys are the same:

- strats2: {field list} <br>This key specifies the fields to stratify on in the second stage. Example:

      strats2: fcstMonth, month, aoDqCap6

- sampleSize2: {int}<br>Specifies the target size of the sample generated by stage 2. Example:

      sampleSize2: 2000000

- where2: {WHERE clause}<br>Restricts the table while creating the sample. Example:

      where2:  AND trgZb='00' AND fcstMonth > 0

- pass2Strat: {ClickHouse table}<br>The pass1Strat key specifies a ClickHouse table to create which summarizes the
  stratification process.  The table lists each level of the strats and counts. Example:

        pass2Strat: tmp.strat2Dq

- pass2Sample: {ClickHouse table}<br>Specifies a ClickHouse table to create which has the sampled loans. Example:

        pass2Sample: tmp.sample2Dq

The final table is specified by:

- modelTable: {ClickHouse table}<br>Example

      modelTable: tmp.modelDq

### Examples

Examples may be found [here]({{ site.baseurl }}/examples.html).
